                                                                              11

HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION
GEORGE V. LAUDER
ERIC D. TYTELL



  I. Introduction
 II. Classical Modes of Undulatory Propulsion
III. Theory of Undulatory Propulsion
     A. Resistive Models
      B. Reactive Models
IV. Experimental Hydrodynamics of Undulatory Propulsion
     A. Axial Propulsion
      B. Function of the Tail
     C. Dorsal and Anal Fin Function
     D. Overall Force Balance and Three‐Dimensional Flow
      E. Undulatory Locomotion in Turbulence
      F. Acceleration and Maneuvering
 V. Integrating Theory and Experimental Data
VI. Prospectus



I. INTRODUCTION

    In the years since publication of the major previous reviews addressing
various aspects of fish undulatory propulsion (Hertel, 1966; Webb, 1975,
1978, 1993b; Aleev, 1977; Bone, 1978; Lindsey, 1978; Magnuson, 1978;
Blake, 1983; Webb and Weihs, 1983; Videler, 1993), one significant new
development stands out: the ability to quantify water flow patterns around
swimming fishes directly. Until recently, investigations of fish propulsion
have had to infer hydrodynamic function from kinematics and theoretical
models. Biologists and engineers interested in how fishes interact with their
fluid environment have had no quantitative way to visualize this interaction,
despite the critical importance of understanding fluid flow patterns produced
by swimming fishes for testing theoretical models and for understanding the
hydrodynamic eVects of diVerent body and fin designs. This predicament
                                         425
Fish Biomechanics: Volume 23                       Copyright # 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
FISH PHYSIOLOGY                                               DOI: 10.1016/S1546-5098(05)23011-X
426                                    GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL


was well expressed by McCutchen (1977) in his chapter in the classic book
Scale EVects in Animal Locomotion (Pedley, 1977). McCutchen (1977,
p. 339) described the current state of research on fish locomotion by stating
that ‘‘considering the man‐hours spent studying fish propulsion, we know
precious little about what the fish does to the fluid.’’
    One early attempt to visualize the flow around swimming fishes directly was
the influential master’s thesis by Rosen (1959). Rosen’s ingenious experiments
involved swimming fish in a shallow pan of water above a thin layer of milk
carefully layered on the bottom. The swimming movements of the fish dis-
turbed the milk layer and revealed general flow patterns which Rosen then
photographed. Subsequent attempts that included the use of dye or Schleiren
methods (McCutchen, 1977; Arnold et al., 1991; Ferry and Lauder, 1996) gave
useful results but provided little information of a quantitative nature.
    The combination of high‐resolution high‐speed video systems, high‐
powered continuous wave lasers, and an image analysis technique called
digital particle image velocimetry (DPIV), developed over the past decade,
has permitted the direct visualization of water flow over the surface and
in the wake of swimming fishes (e.g., Müller et al., 1997; Wolfgang et al.,
1999; Anderson et al., 2000; Lauder, 2000; Müller et al., 2001; Lauder and
Drucker, 2002; Lauder et al., 2003; Tytell, 2004a; Tytell and Lauder, 2004).
These data have provided a wealth of new information on the fluid flows
generated by the body, tail, and fins of freely swimming fishes, and represent
a significant new arena of investigation not described in previous reviews.
    In this chapter, we focus on recent experimental hydrodynamic data on
undulatory locomotion in fishes, and provide as background a general
description of the major theoretical model of undulatory propulsion. Hy-
drodynamic flows are caused by undulatory movements of the body and fins,
and so we preface our discussion of models and experiments with an analysis
of the classical kinematic modes of undulatory locomotion in fishes.


II. CLASSICAL MODES OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION

    One of the most enduring features of the literature on fish locomotion is
the classification of fish swimming into general ‘‘modes’’ based on exemplar
species (Breder, 1926; Lindsey, 1978). For example, eel locomotion is re-
ferred to as anguilliform after the eel genus Anguilla, and is used as short-
hand for fishes that undulate large portions of their body during propulsion,
generally with nearly a full wavelength present on the body at any given
time (Gray, 1933; Gillis, 1996). Thunniform locomotion is based on tunas
(Thunnus), and is verbal shorthand for fish locomotion involving a high
aspect ratio tail with relatively little lateral oscillation of the body (Donley
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                   427




Fig. 11.1. Four classical categories of fish undulatory propulsion illustrated with fish outlines
and midlines derived from recent experimental data. This figure updates the classical depiction
presented in Lindsey (1978). Outlines of swimming fishes are shown above with displacements
that to illustrate forward progression, while midlines at equally spaced time intervals throughout
a tail beat are superimposed below, aligned at the tip of the snout; each time is shown in a
distinct color. Anguilliform mode based on Anguilla, subcarangiform mode based on Lepomis,
carangiform mode based on Scomber, and thunniform mode based on Euthynnus. All fishes were
between 20 and 25 cm total length (L), and swam at a similar speed of 1.6 to 1.8 Ls 1. Times
shown indicate duration of the tail beat. Scale bars ¼ 2 cm. [Fish images are based on data from
Tytell and Lauder (2004), Tytell (unpublished), and Donley and Dickson (2000).]
428                                    GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL


and Dickson, 2000; Graham and Dickson, 2004). Other major categories of
undulatory propulsion include carangiform locomotion (up to one half wave
on the body) and subcarangiform swimming (more than one half wave but
less than one full wave), although additional names have also been used for
this mode (Webb, 1975; Webb and Blake, 1985; also see Chapter 7 in this
volume).
    While these categories endure because of their utility in describing basic
patterns of locomotion and because they are easy to visualize with a simple
two‐dimensional analysis, they are based on older data, sometimes contain-
ing inaccuracies or obtained under unsteady swimming conditions. Perhaps
the most common misconception in the current literature concerns anguilli-
form locomotion, as a result of Sir James Gray’s classic paper (Gray, 1933),
which suggested that large‐amplitude undulations occur along the entire eel
body at all speeds. Recent data (see data and discussion in Gillis, 1996;
Lauder and Tytell, 2004; Tytell and Lauder, 2004), however, indicate that
the anterior body only begins undulating at high swimming speeds and
during acceleration; at lower speeds, undulation is confined to the posterior
region. The eel photographed by Gray (1933) was most likely accelerating
(Lauder and Tytell, 2004; Tytell, 2004b), although these images of eel
locomotion are often reproduced as representing steady locomotion. Addi-
tionally, careful measurements by Donley and Dickson (2000) suggest that
thunniform locomotion is not a dramatically diVerent swimming mode, but
rather a relatively modest change in the carangiform mode.
    In Figure 11.1, we use recent quantitative kinematic data from the litera-
ture to produce an update to the classical illustration in Lindsey (1978) of
representative modes of undulatory locomotion in fishes. The fishes illustrated
in this figure all swam at similar relative speeds (1.6 to 1.8 Ls 1), were all
between 20 and 25 cm in total length, and swam in a flow tank under carefully
controlled conditions in which data were taken only when fishes were swim-
ming steadily. At this moderately high sustained swimming speed of 1.8 Ls 1,
there is remarkable similarity in the undulatory profiles of all four classes of
locomotion. Eels show greater lateral oscillations in the front half of the body
at this speed, but the amplitude envelopes from subcarangiform to thunniform
are extremely similar, with nonlinear amplitude profiles that rapidly increase
toward the tail and similar overall patterns of body oscillation.
    The similarity becomes more pronounced at slower swimming speeds,
particularly at less than 1.0 Ls 1 (Figure 11.2). A common characteristic of
undulatory propulsion at low speed is that anterior body oscillations are
minimal (Lauder, 2005); only when speed exceeds 1.0 Ls 1 does the front
half of the body begin to oscillate laterally. For example, Figure 11.2 shows
data from largemouth bass and American eels, illustrating their similarity at
low speeds and the increase in lateral oscillation as speed increases (Jayne
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                     429




Fig. 11.2. (A) Outline of a largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides) to illustrate the major fins
and fin positions along the body and the longitudinal body profile in lateral view. (B–C)
Midlines reconstructed from patterns of body bending during steady swimming in largemouth
bass at speeds of 0.7 and 2.4 Ls 1. At the slow speed, body bending is confined to the posterior
half of the body, but at higher speeds the head begins to oscillate laterally. (D) Outline of an
American eel (Anguilla rostrata) to show the contrast in body shape with the bass as seen in
lateral view. (E) Reconstructed midlines of an eel swimming steadily at 0.5 Ls 1. Note the
similarity in amplitude and proportion of the body undulating for low‐speed swimming in both
the eel and the bass. Successive midlines in all plots are spaced equally in time during a half tail
beat cycle. Z, lateral excursion in % body length (L); X, distance along the body, L. [Panels (B)
and (C) modified from Jayne and Lauder (1995); panel (E) based on data from Tytell (2004a).]
430                                    GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL


and Lauder, 1995). Recruitment of increasingly anterior musculature with
increased speed results in greater oscillation of the anterior body. At slow
speeds, there is no anterior myotomal muscle strain, no body bending, and
hence no work done in the front half of the body to power locomotion (e.g.,
Figure 11.2B and E).
    It is our view that recent experimental data increasingly demonstrate that
these taxonomically based categories do not represent important hydrody-
namic diVerences, even though they do provide useful verbal shorthand for
describing broad types of fish movement. In particular, we are concerned
about two aspects of this classification scheme. First, the body amplitude
profiles used to define locomotor categories, especially at slow speeds, are
remarkably similar across these categories. Even fishes as diVerent as eels
and bass show very similar amplitude profiles at slow swimming speeds
(Figure 11.2). Plotting midline (two‐dimensional) amplitude profiles thus
does little to reveal biologically significant hydrodynamic diVerences among
species. Second, and perhaps more importantly, these categories ignore the
crucial three‐dimensional geometry of fishes. As illustrated in Figure 11.2A
and D, most fishes possess numerous fins and regions such as the caudal
peduncle that, as we discuss later, shed vortices and accelerate flow. These
separation points are not visible in the two‐dimensional slice through the fish
midline so often used to depict locomotor modes. Many fish species have
distinct tails, as well, that function like a propeller, accelerating flow and
leaving a thrust signature in the wake (Lauder et al., 2002; Fish and Lauder,
2005; Lauder, 2005). Another key point, which is not evident from examin-
ing standard two‐dimensional depictions of fish swimming (like Figure 11.1),
is that the dorsal and anal fin accelerate and redirect freestream flow; thus,
the tail encounters incident flow greatly altered from the freestream
(Drucker and Lauder, 2001a; Lauder and Drucker, 2004).
    It is likely that the major diVerences in locomotor hydrodynamics among
fishes are primarily a consequence of diVerences in their three‐dimensional
geometry and longitudinal area profiles, and not so much from diVerences in
the amplitude profiles of a two‐dimensional slice through the middle of the
fish. In the following we present data showing a substantial hydrodynamic
diVerence in wake structure between eels and other fish species studied to date.
These diVerences are not attributable to midline amplitude profiles, but rather
to the substantial diVerences in three‐dimensional body shapes (Figure 11.2).


III. THEORY OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION

    Recent experimental hydrodynamic studies have all been performed in
the context of several physical theories of undulatory locomotion, based on
midline kinematics such as those we described previously. Although such
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                      431

theories largely pass over some points that we argue are quite important,
such as the three‐dimensional shape of fish bodies, they provide some
useful insights and an important context for the experimental studies that
follow.
    To begin, we approximate a fish in one of the simplest ways possible: as a
flapping hydrofoil. A fish’s tail, particularly that of fishes like tunas, is like a
section of a hydrofoil moving from side to side. Two main parameters
characterize the fluid dynamics of a flapping foil: one, Reynolds number,
Re, describes the steady motion of the foil through the fluid; and the other,
Strouhal number, St, describes the flapping motion.
    Reynolds number is a dimensionless number that approximates the
relative importance of forces due to the fluid’s viscosity and forces due to
the fluid’s inertia. It is often written in two equivalent ways, as
                                 rUL                 UL
                          Re ¼           or   Re ¼      ;                       ð1Þ
                                                     v
where U is average forward speed, L is the length of the fish or the chord
length of the foil, r is the fluid density, and  and n are the fluid’s dynamic and
kinematic viscosity, respectively. The definitions of the length and speed are
intentionally vague, because small diVerences in Reynolds number have little
physical significance. Typically, only order of magnitude diVerences in Re are
informative, although at certain critical points, like the transition from
laminar to turbulent flow, small Re changes can lead to dramatic changes
in the flow patterns. Nonetheless, flows are divided into three broad regimes:
the viscous regime, Re < 1, in which viscous forces dominate; the inertial
regime, Re > 1000, in which inertial forces dominate; and an intermediate
regime between the two, in which both types of forces are important. For
more information, see textbooks such as Denny (1993) or Faber (1995).
    Reynolds number involves only the steady motion of the fish (or foil).
Strouhal number, in turn, describes how fast the tail is flapping relative to its
forward speed. It is defined as
                                       fA
                                     St ¼ ;                               ð2Þ
                                       U
where f is the flapping frequency, A is the flapping amplitude (the total
distance from maximum excursion on one side to maximum excursion on
the other), and U is again the forward speed. Strictly speaking, St describes
the wake behind the flapping foil, not the foil itself, but, for biological
purposes, the two definitions are often used interchangeably (Triantafyllou
et al., 1993). Fishes, marine mammals, and even flying animals seem to flap
with a Strouhal number near 0.3 (Triantafyllou et al., 1993; Taylor et al.,
2003; Rohr and Fish, 2004), although values from close to 0 to near 1 have
been reported (Horton, et al., 2003; Rohr and Fish, 2004).
432   GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                              433

    Figure 11.3A shows data from eels (Anguilla) swimming over a speed
range of 0.6 to 1.8 Ls 1; St for these eels varied between 0.31 and 0.41, close
to the optimal flapping value predicted for swimming fishes (Triantafyllou
and Triantafyllou, 1995). For a given tail (or foil) shape, experimental and
theoretical studies have shown that its thrust and eYciency are strongly
related to Strouhal number (Anderson et al., 1998; Murray and Howle,
2003; Read et al., 2003). Typically, thrust increases with increasing St, but
eYciency peaks near 0.3 (Read et al., 2003), which is the value for most
swimming fishes.
    However, other data show that fishes may swim with apparently non-
optimal Strouhal numbers during swimming, especially at lower speeds.
Figure 11.3B shows St for Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus) swimming;
at slower swimming speeds of 0.5 Ls 1, St is greater than 0.6, much higher
than expected for optimal thrust production. These fish may genuinely
be ineYcient at slow speeds, or Strouhal number may not capture the
complexities of fish swimming eYciency at slow speeds.
    To proceed beyond this simplistic idea of fish swimming, one must start
to examine the swimming motion in more detail. The theories described in
the following section treat midline kinematics as a given. In principle, these
kinematics result from a complex interaction between the internal forces
from muscles and the external forces from the fluid. As a fish swims, muscles
deform the body, applying forces to the fluid around the body, but the fluid
applies forces back on the body, changing the body shape, which changes the
muscle forces, and so on. To model the body deformation accurately, both
sets of forces would have to be accounted for simultaneously. Few models
attempt to solve this combined problem because of its complexity (but see
Ekeberg, 1993; Cortez et al., 2004). Instead, most theories treat the body as a
given two‐dimensional shape and examine the fluid forces separately.

A. Resistive Models

    In one simple model, first proposed by Taylor (1952) and termed a
‘‘resistive’’ model, thrust is estimated from the sum of the drag forces on a


Fig. 11.3. Strouhal number and fish locomotion. (A) Tail‐beat frequency versus amplitude at a
variety of diVerent swimming speeds for eel (Anguilla) locomotion; curves indicate a constant
Strouhal number of 0.3, and colored symbols from white to red indicate increasing locomotor
speed. Note the relative constancy of Strouhal number for eels swimming both over this speed
range and within speeds. (B) Data for swimming Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus) over a speed
range of 0.5 to nearly 1.8 Ls 1. Note the substantial increase in Strouhal number at slow
swimming speeds. [Panel (A) modified from Tytell (2004a); data plotted in panel (B) courtesy
of Jacquan Horton, Adam Summers, and Eliot Drucker.]
434                                    GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL


body with a wave traveling backward at a speed V greater than its forward
swimming motion U. The body is divided into many segments down its
length, and the drag forces from each segment are summed based on the
equation
                                   1
                                D ¼ CD rSu2 ;                                ð3Þ
                                   2
where CD is the drag coeYcient, a measure of how ‘‘draggy’’ the segment is,
r is the fluid density, S is an area, typically the presented area or the surface
area of the segment, and u is the segment’s velocity, including contributions
from both the fish’s forward motion and its lateral undulations. Typically, D
must be broken into components perpendicular and parallel to the body,
because CD diVers in diVerent directions. Finding the total force is a some-
what lengthy but mostly geometric exercise of identifying all of the segment
angles. The model suVers from other substantial problems, though, most
notably because Eq. (3) is valid for steady motions, but may not hold for
undulatory motion, because the model assumes that anterior segments do
not aVect flow as fluid moves past the body, and because estimating CD can
be diYcult. Webb (1975) discusses the problems with resistive models in
more detail.
    Although this model is limited in its ability to estimate resistive forces,
this is not to say that these types of forces are unimportant. They may play a
role in generating thrust (Tytell, 2004a) and they may contribute to reducing
propulsive eYciency (Webb, 1975).

B. Reactive Models
     The preferred analytical model of fish swimming is Sir James Lighthill’s
elongated body theory (1960, 1971), which is based on adding up the forces
due to the lateral acceleration and deceleration of the body as it undulates
from side to side. This model is often termed ‘‘reactive,’’ because it estimates
forces based on the acceleration reaction, an eVect in which fluids resist
changes in velocity of a moving body, as if the body had additional, ‘‘virtu-
al,’’ mass (Batchelor, 1973; Childress, 1981; Daniel, 1984). Other forces that
could contribute to thrust, including those resulting from the fluid’s viscosi-
ty, are assumed to be negligible. The following explanation closely follows
that of Lighthill (1969) and Webb (1975).
     Lighthill (1960) estimated force and power by adding up changes in
energy. Without viscosity, there are only three places energy changes while
a fish swims (Figure 11.4). First, the total energy added to the system comes
from the fish’s movements. This energy is consumed in two ways: (1) pushing
the fish forward (thrust power) and (2) creating the wake (wake power).
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                  435




Fig. 11.4. Schematic view of Lighthill’s (1960) reactive model showing the geometrical argument
used to derive average thrust power. Top: Outlines of an eel at two diVerent points in time
(indicated by solid and dashed lines). The tail region is outlined with a box and enlarged below.
Bottom: Enlarged view of tail tip segments at two points in time, showing geometrical para-
meters and the three components of energy in the system (bold equations). The two similar
triangles used in the analysis (A and B) are outlined in red and blue, respectively. Total power
added to the system, shown at the top, is consumed generating the wake, at right, and propelling
the fish forward, at bottom. This figure is discussed in detail in the text. (After Webb, 1975.)



Energy has to be conserved, so these changes in energy must add up to zero.
Thus, recalling that power is the rate of change of energy,

     ðtotal undulatory powerÞ            ðthrust powerÞ         ðwake powerÞ ¼ 0             ð4Þ

    If we average these changes in energy over a tail‐beat cycle, we can
express their mean values based on a geometrical argument examining only
the tail’s motion. Because undulation is symmetric, the side‐to‐side motion
of the body produces forces that average out over a tail beat. Only the tip of
the tail is diVerent: when it changes the fluid’s momentum, that momentum
is shed into the wake. Thus, to determine average thrust and power, we can
restrict our analysis to the tail tip.
    First, we examine the tail’s motion. The segment at the tip of the tail
moves forward and laterally during a time period dt (Figure 11.4). We define
436                                    GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL


the length of the segment (projected on the swimming direction) to be Vdt,
where V is the speed of the body wave. During the time interval, the segment
moves forward a distance Udt and laterally a distance Wdt, where U is the
forward swimming speed and W is the lateral velocity of the tail tip. The
water, however, is pushed laterally over a smaller distance wdt, because of
how the forward and lateral motions combine (Figure 11.4). This velocity
w approximates the motion of the tail segment perpendicular to itself,
assuming that the tail does not make a large angle to the swimming direc-
tion. The diVerence between w, the velocity that actually aVects the fluid, and
the lateral tail velocity W is related to the diVerence in the body wave speed
V and the swimming speed U. If the fish were pinned in place, such that U
were zero, all of the lateral motion would aVect the fluid and w would equal
W. But if U and V were the same, then the tail tip would slip exactly into the
spot just vacated by an upstream segment and the fluid would see no lateral
motion at all.
    To derive w, we examine the two similar triangles A and B in Figure 11.4:
                              wdt    ðV UÞdt
                                   ¼                                        ð5Þ
                              W dt     V dt
or
                                       V       U
                               w¼W                 ;                        ð6Þ
                                           V
which is, as we expected, less than W. Because w is the lateral velocity the
fluid encounters, the tail increases the lateral momentum of the fluid by mVw,
where mV is the virtual mass per unit length at the tail tip. This momentum is
shed oV the tail tip into the wake at the same rate the fish swims forward, U,
and the tail itself does work on it as it moves laterally at a rate W. Thus, the
total power is
                              Ptotal ¼ mV wUW :                             ð7Þ

    As discussed previously, this input power is divided up into two outputs:
the thrust power and the power to create the wake. The wake power is the
kinetic energy of the fluid shed into the wake at speed U,
                                     1
                              Pwake ¼ mV w2 U:                              ð8Þ
                                     2

   Subtracting the wake power (8) from the total power (7), according to the
energy balance (4), we arrive at the average thrust power:
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                 437

                                               1 2
                        Pthrust ¼ mV ðwWU        w UÞ:                     ð9Þ
                                               2
Because power is force multiplied by velocity, we can also write the average
thrust force Fthrust as Pthrust / U.
    The virtual mass per unit length mV is fairly well approximated by the
density of water r multiplied by the area of the circle that circumscribes the
tail tip, including any fins sticking oV (Lighthill, 1970). Thus,
                                    1
                                mV ¼ prd 2 ;                              ð10Þ
                                    4
where d is the dorso‐ventral height of the caudal fin at the trailing edge.
    We can gain some insight into Eq. (9) if we assume that the body has a
simple, constant amplitude traveling wave. Averaged over the tail beat
period, we find that mean thrust Fthrust is proportional to V2–U2. Thus we
return to Gray’s (1933) observation: for positive thrust, the body wave speed
should be faster and in the opposite direction as the swimming speed. In fact,
to maximize thrust, body wave speed should be as large as possible.
    The reason why fish do not use the largest body wave speed possible
becomes clear if we calculate eYciency. The Froude propulsive eYciency  is
the ratio of useful (thrust) power to total power, or
                              Pthrust      1V U
                         ¼           ¼1        ;                         ð11Þ
                              Ptotal       2 V
based on Eqs. (6)–(9). Maximum eYciency is achieved when body wave
speed is equal to the swimming speed. Clearly, fishes are faced with a
tradeoV. At maximum eYciency, thrust is zero, and at high thrust, eYciency
is low. Note that the eYciency cannot possibly be lower than 0.5, however,
according to Eq. (11).
    The reactive model described previously makes the assumption that
undulatory amplitudes are small, so that the angles the body makes with
the swimming direction are close to zero. When angles become larger, more
energy is lost into the wake than Eq. (8) predicts. Lighthill (1971) developed
a large‐amplitude version of the theory, which corrects for this eVect and
also predicts lateral forces, which are easier to compare to experimental
measurements, as we will discuss later.
    Both large‐ and small‐amplitude elongated body theories suVer from an
important problem. They make the assumption that the Reynolds number is
eVectively infinite, meaning that inertial forces completely dominate viscous
forces. The Reynolds number, however, is a notoriously fuzzy concept.
While the Reynolds number for the whole body may be very large and
eVectively infinite, the Reynolds numbers for the tip of the tail and the edges
438                                   GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL


of the fins are probably much smaller. In fact, you will almost always be able
to find a structure small enough that its Reynolds number is too low to
neglect viscosity. These viscous eVects on small structures actually can be
very important for forces on the overall body. First, they indicate that
viscosity can never truly be completely neglected. Thus, resistive forces never
become completely negligible. Second, and more importantly, viscous eVects
around sharp edges, like the trailing edge of an airfoil, can cause large
changes in the flow around the body. For example, the lift force develops
around an airfoil because of viscous eVects around the sharp trailing
edge (Faber, 1995). Wu (1971) developed a theory of fish swimming that
incorporates an approximation of this eVect.
    Additionally, as we discussed previously, midline kinematics do not
account for important diVerences in body shape. The virtual mass mV at
the tail accounts for the caudal fin size, but trailing edges of dorsal, anal,
pectoral, and pelvic fins, all of which are independently activated, are
not represented in the theory. Weihs (1972) accounted for other fins in
his model of rapid turns, but three‐dimensional computational approaches
(e.g., Zhu et al., 2002) show more promise for modeling the diversity of
swimming behaviors. Nonetheless, elongated body theory has been used
regularly in fish swimming studies, both directly to make predictions
of force, and indirectly to inform analyses of parameters such as eYciency
(e.g., Weihs, 1972; Webb, 1975; Hess and Videler, 1984; Videler and Hess,
1984; Daniel and Webb, 1987; Müller et al., 2002; Tytell, 2004a; Tytell
and Lauder, 2004).


IV. EXPERIMENTAL HYDRODYNAMICS OF
    UNDULATORY PROPULSION

    Within the past 10 years, the ready availability of two new technologies
has revolutionized our ability to study fluid flows generated by swimming
fishes. Rather than use the theories described earlier to make hydrodynamic
predictions based on kinematics, the combination of high‐speed video and
DPIV has allowed biologists to measure fluid flow directly. First, the new
generation of high‐speed video systems with resolution of at least 1024 by
1024 pixels, which can operate (at this resolution) at rates above 500 frames
per second (fps), permits a whole new level of detail and resolution for
imaging swimming fishes. Data obtained from such systems, particularly
when cameras are synchronized for two or more simultaneous views of
the swimming fish, permit highly accurate quantification of body and fin
movements.
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                 439

    The true utility of such systems becomes evident when they are used with
high‐power continuous‐wave lasers for DPIV, an engineering technique to
quantify fluid flow by imaging small reflective particles in the flow (Willert
and Gharib, 1991; RaVel et al., 1998). Many engineering DPIV studies use
pulsed lasers, which typically operate with a maximal temporal resolution of
15 Hz, and often much less, which is suYcient when steady flows are being
studied but insuYcient to understand the dynamic unsteady character of
flows generated by swimming fishes. In contrast, recent biological DPIV
work with high‐speed video in combination with continuous lasers allows
images of fluid flow patterns to be obtained at the full framing rate of the
video (500 fps or greater), and can thus provide a detailed picture of flow
separation and vortex formation by fins.
    The experimental approach used to understand water flow during undu-
latory locomotion by freely swimming fishes is illustrated in Figure 11.5
(Anderson et al., 2000; Drucker and Lauder, 2001a; Lauder and Drucker,
2002; Lauder and Drucker, 2004; Tytell and Lauder, 2004; Wilga and
Lauder, 2004). Fishes swim in a recirculating flow tank and are induced to
maintain station with their body or fins projecting into the laser light sheet,
generated by a continuous argon ion laser and a series of focusing lenses.
Small (12 mm mean diameter) near‐neutrally buoyant reflective particles are
mixed into the flow to provide reflections from the laser light sheet, which
are recorded by a high‐speed video camera. Images of fish position in the
flow and relative to the light sheet are recorded by one or more additional
synchronized video cameras. By reorienting laser optical components, it
is possible to produce light sheets in diVerent orthogonal orientations
(Figure 11.5B and C) and hence obtain, in separate experiments, a
three‐dimensional impression of flow patterns. Images obtained from
these high‐speed videos (Figure 11.5D) are analyzed using standard DPIV
cross‐correlation techniques (Willert and Gharib, 1991; RaVel et al., 1998)
to yield a matrix of velocity vectors that estimate flow in the light sheet
(Figure 11.5E).
    Standard DPIV using a single video camera orthogonal to the light sheet
produces only the two velocity components in the plane illuminated by the
laser. It is also possible to use two cameras, oVset by a known angle, to
record stereo images and hence reconstruct the three components (x, y, and
z) of flow velocity in a plane (e.g., Willert, 1997; Veerman and Den Boer,
2000; Westerweel and Oord, 2000). Stereo‐DPIV data obtained for steady
undulatory locomotion in trout (Oncorhynchus) were presented by Nauen
and Lauder (2002b), who provided a simple three‐dimensional analysis of
the wake and calculated locomotor eYciency (see also Sakakibara et al.,
2004).
440   GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                  441

    These velocity vectors can then be used to estimate forces by analyzing
the vorticity, a measure of the local angular velocity of a fluid element
(Faber, 1995). Specifically, the vortex structure in the wake of a fish indicates
the magnitude, angle, and, to some extent, timing of the forces the fish
applied to the fluid. One can estimate force on the basis of this structure in
two ways, both of which actually produce estimates of impulse, I, the
average force multiplied by the time over which it was applied. By dividing
the impulse by an appropriate time interval (typically half the tail‐beat
period), one can estimate average force. In the first, most commonly used
method, researchers assume that counter‐rotating vortices in the wake are
connected above and below the plane to form a small‐core vortex ring. By
using multiple planes to measure the geometry of the ring, impulse can be
estimated as
                                          I ¼ rAG;                                         ð12Þ
where r is water density, A is the area circumscribed by the vortex ring, and
  is the circulation of the vortex cores (a measure of total vorticity in a
region) (Batchelor, 1973). The second, and more rigorous, method applies
the equation used to derive (12):
                                 1
                                     ð
                             I ¼ r x  v dV ;                            ð13Þ
                                 2
where I is now a vector impulse, x is the position vector connecting a fluid
element to the place the force was applied, and v is the vorticity vector
(Batchelor, 1973). This method requires accurate estimation of vorticity,
which is often diYcult using DPIV, but potentially produces more accurate
impulse estimates than Eq. (12) in wakes with complex vortex structure
(Rosen et al., 2004; Tytell, 2004a). Finally, Noca et al. (1999) derived a
method to estimate true instantaneous force production, rather than average



Fig. 11.5. Experimental arrangement used for hydrodynamic analysis of water flow patterns
over the body and in the wake of freely swimming fishes. Laser light sheet is shown in blue. (A)
Fishes swim in a recirculating flow tank, maintaining station against oncoming flow. Optical
components focus the laser beam into a thin (1–2 mm thick) light sheet, and fishes are positioned
so that the body and/or tail intersect this light sheet. Small (12 mm mean diameter) reflective,
nearly neutrally buoyant particles circulate with the flow. One high‐speed video camera films
reflections from these particles while a second camera monitors the position of the fish, either
through a mirror or from above or below. The laser light sheet may be reoriented into two other
orthogonal orientations (B, transverse plane; C, horizontal plane) in separate experiments to
quantify flow in these planes. (D) Video images are analyzed using cross‐correlation (Willert and
Gharib, 1991) to yield matrices of velocity vectors (E, yellow arrows) estimating flow velocities
through time.
442                                   GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL


forces from impulse estimates, but, to our knowledge, this approach has not
been applied successfully in any studies of aquatic animal locomotion.
    The experimental approach using flow tanks, high‐speed video, and
DPIV described previously has two significant advantages. First, the swim-
ming speed and position of the fish can be accurately controlled by adjusting
speed in the flow tank, and thus true steady swimming can be studied if care
is taken during data acquisition. Controlled maneuvers can also be elicited
from a known steady swimming posture (e.g., Wilga and Lauder, 1999;
Drucker and Lauder, 2001b; Tytell, 2004b). Flow patterns can change
considerably with speed or if fishes are accelerating (Drucker and Lauder,
2000; Tytell, 2004b). Second, use of multiple simultaneous cameras
allows one or more cameras to record fish position in the laser light sheet
(Figure 11.5A). It is diYcult to overemphasize the importance of both
controlling fish swimming speed and knowing where the fish is relative to
the light sheet. Because of the complex three‐dimensional body shape of
most fishes, data obtained without knowing the position of the fins or body
relative to the light sheet are extremely diYcult to interpret. Other studies
(Müller et al., 1997, 2001) have applied DPIV to fish swimming in still water,
which has the advantage that turbulence is lower, in principle, but recording
steady behaviors is much more diYcult.

A. Axial Propulsion

    Flow fields measured in the wake of swimming eels (Anguilla) show that
oscillation of the body produces a wake with laterally oriented momentum
jets and negligible downstream flow (momentum added opposite the direc-
tion of movement) (Figure 11.6; Müller et al., 2001; Tytell and Lauder,
2004). Wake momentum is thus directed to the side and not in the stream-
wise direction along the axis of travel; each pulse of lateral momentum
probably represents jet flow through the center of unlinked vortex rings.
These lateral momentum jets are produced almost entirely by the final third
of the body (Figure 11.7) and are not convected along the body via undula-
tory motion (Tytell and Lauder, 2004). Previously, structures termed
‘‘proto‐vortices’’ had been observed along the body (Müller et al., 2001).
While these structures do exist (Figure 11.7), they do not contain much
vorticity and are therefore not responsible for the vortex wake structure
(Tytell and Lauder, 2004). As can be seen in Figure 11.7, there is very little
vorticity upstream along the body. Instead, the posterior 15% of the body
produces lateral jets of fluid, which results in strong (up to 90 s 1) but
unstable shear layers in the wake. The shear layer is visible between two
regions of flow traveling in opposite directions, as between the first and
second jets in Figure 11.6. The final wake forms through rollup of this shear
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                    443




Fig. 11.6. Average flow field behind an eel (Anguilla rostrata) at 90% of the tail‐beat cycle,
recorded in the horizontal plane as shown schematically above and in Figure 11.5C. The vector
field shown is a phase average of 14 tail beats. Vorticity is shown in color in the background, and
velocity vectors, calculated from high‐speed video images of the wake, are shown in black. The
eel’s tail is in blue at the bottom, with its motion indicated by small red arrows, scaled in the
same way as the flow vectors. Freestream flow is from bottom to top and has been subtracted to
show the vortex structure in the wake. Vector heads are retained on vectors shorter than 2.5
cm s 1 to shown the direction of the flow; otherwise vector head size is scaled with velocity
magnitude. Numbered large red arrows show the three regions of lateral momentum in the wake
shed by the tail. (Modified from Tytell and Lauder, 2004.)
444                                              GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL




Fig. 11.7. Flow fields close to the body of a swimming eel (gray body outline). Velocity vectors
are shown in black for six times during the tail‐beat cycle. The lateral position of the eel’s snout
(oV the view below) is shown as a black arrow. Velocities are phase averaged across 14 tail beats
by interpolating the normal gridded coordinate system on to a system defined by the distance
from the eel’s body and the distance along the body from the head. Red and blue arrows indicate
the major clockwise and counterclockwise flow directions, respectively, near the body. (Modified
from Tytell and Lauder, 2004.)



layer (Figure 11.8), which separates into two or more vortices that are fully
developed approximately one tail‐beat cycle later. This vortex shedding
pattern matches well the pattern of body kinematics (Figure 11.1) with
relatively little oscillation of the front half of the body.
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                   445




Fig. 11.8. (A–C) Schematic diagram of wake formation behind a steadily swimming eel,
Anguilla. Vortices shed by the tail are shown at three diVerent times in the locomotor cycle as
red and blue arrows; primary vortices are solid, while secondary vortices formed by roll‐up of
the shear layer shed by the tail are shown as dotted lines. Lateral momentum jets to each side are
indicated by block arrows. (Modified from Tytell and Lauder, 2004.) (D) Hypothesized three‐
dimensional flow, based on (A–C). Lateral vortex rings (shown in blue) are partially linked at
the shear layer, but separate completely in the far wake.



    As eels increase their swimming speed over a range from 0.5 to 2.0 Ls 1,
the fundamental character of the wake does not change (Tytell, 2004a). As
long as swimming is steady, there are large lateral momentum jets and little
streamwise momentum added to the wake.
    In contrast to the wake structure of eels, the wake of fishes such as trout,
mackerel, or sunfish shows considerable streamwise momentum (Lauder
et al., 2002, 2003; Nauen and Lauder, 2002a,b). Figure 11.9 shows a hori-
zontal slice through the wake of a swimming trout, Oncorhynchus. Two
distinct centers of vorticity are present in this mid‐body wake section, as is
a substantial central momentum jet with a strong downstream component.
A vertical slice through the wake flow (see Figure 11.5A) of mackerel reveals
distinct tip vortices and provides another view of the downstream compo-
nent of the tail momentum jet (Figure 11.10A). Taken together, the horizon-
tal and vertical wake slices suggest that mackerel, trout, and bluegill produce
a linked vortex ring structure in their wakes (Figure 11.10B). Also, note that
446                                            GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL




Fig. 11.9. ‘‘Subcarangiform’’ wake flow pattern in the horizontal plane from a freely swimming
trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) swimming steadily at 1.0 Ls 1. Light sheet orientation is shown
schematically above. Freestream flow is from left to right and has been subtracted to reveal two
vortex centers produced by the caudal fin. These two vortex centers represent a planar section
through a vortex ring with a high velocity central momentum jet directed downstream and
laterally. (Modified from Lauder et al., 2002.)


although downstream momentum is present in fishes as diverse as bluegill
sunfish and mackerel, lateral forces are almost always at least equal
to streamwise forces and are often as much as two to three times larger
(Figure 11.10B) (Lauder and Drucker, 2002; Nauen and Lauder, 2002a).
    While this wake structure is diVerent from that of eels, the vorticity
pattern in a horizontal section along the body of fishes with distinct tails is
similar to that observed in eels (compare Figure 11.11 to Figure 11.7). In
both cases, virtually all wake vorticity is developed along the posterior third
of the body.
    Anderson et al. (2000) performed a much more detailed analysis of flow
close to the body than is shown in Figures 11.7 and 11.11. By examining the
boundary layer, a region close to the body where fluid velocities change from
the free stream flow velocity to the body velocity, they estimated skin friction
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                  447




Fig. 11.10. (A) Flow field in the vertical plane in the wake of mackerel (Scomber japonicus)
swimming steadily at 1.2 Ls 1. Two centers of vorticity are clearly present that were shed by the
dorsal and ventral tips of the tail, and the central momentum jet through the tail vortex ring is
visible as accelerated flow between the vortex centers. Light sheet orientation is shown schema-
tically above. (Modified from Nauen and Lauder, 2002a.) (B) Schematic model of vortex rings
(shown in blue) in the wake of fishes with discrete caudal fins, showing both lateral and dorsal
views. During steady locomotion at 1.5 Ls 1 the tail sheds linked vortex rings with a central jet
of high momentum flow, shown as thick black arrows weaving through the vortex ring centers.
For bluegill sunfish (Lepomis macrochirus) swimming at this speed, the high‐velocity jet flow
makes an average angle of 58 with the axis of progression, and the tail generates a mean thrust
force of 14 mN, with a mean side force of 23 mN. The reaction force on the tail is shown as a red
arrow. (From Lauder and Drucker, 2002.)
448                                              GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL




Fig. 11.11. Flow fields close to the body of a swimming bluegill sunfish (Lepomis macrochirus,
gray body outline) swimming in a ‘‘subcarangiform’’ mode at 1.65 Ls 1. Velocity vectors are
shown in black for six times during the tail beat cycle. The lateral position of the sunfish’s snout
(oV the view below) is shown as a large black arrow. Red and blue arrows indicate the major
clockwise and counterclockwise flow directions, respectively, near the body.




drag on the bodies of freely swimming scup (Stenotomus chrysops) and
smooth dogfish (Mustelus canis). The magnitude of the drag force on a
swimming body has been long debated, with some suggesting that fishes
can reduce their drag below that of a stretched straight body (Gray, 1936;
Barrett et al., 1999) and others suggesting it should be higher (Lighthill,
1971; Webb, 1975). The Anderson et al. (2000) boundary layer measure-
ments clearly indicate that undulatory motion increases drag on both car-
angiform and anguilliform swimmers.
   The diVerences between the wakes from these two types of swimmers
may result less from diVerences in their midline kinematics (Figure 11.1),
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                  449

and more from diVerences in the body shapes between eels and other fishes,
particularly diVerences in their tails (see Figure 11.2). Midline kinematics
between these fishes are not identical, but the diVerences are small, whereas
their body shapes are very diVerent. The wake diVerences indicate an impor-
tant physical diVerence, as well. When fishes swim steadily, the total drag
force must balance thrust over a tail‐beat cycle, leading Schultz and Webb
(2002) to suggest that there should be no thrust signature in the wake.
Indeed, this is what is observed for eel locomotion (Figure 11.6) but not
for data from fish such as trout, bluegill, and mackerel that have discrete
caudal fin propulsors (Figures 11.9 and 11.10). Tytell and Lauder (2004) and
Fish and Lauder (2005) suggested that the tails of such fishes function as a
discrete propeller, separate anatomically and functionally from the major
areas incurring drag during undulatory locomotion. In a boat with an
external motor, the hull of the boat incurs the majority of drag, while the
propeller is a separate thrust‐generating structure. Sections of a boat wake
behind a propeller show a clear thrust signature, just as the wake behind
fishes with discrete caudal fins demonstrates thrust. By analogy, the caudal
fin of fishes functions as a propeller, with its own intrinsic muscula-
ture powering movement. It is not surprising, then, that a clear thrust
signature is evident in both experimental wake flow visualizations and
in three‐dimensional computational models that include a distinct tail
propulsor (e.g., Zhu et al., 2002).

B. Function of the Tail
    Many fishes have exquisite control over the motion of their tail, allowing
them to vary the relative magnitudes of thrust, lateral forces, and lift forces.
Even fishes with externally symmetrical (homocercal) tail structures can
control the shape and motion of the dorsal and ventral lobes, which usually
results in asymmetrical motion and influences the direction of wake flow
(Lauder, 1989, 2000; Lauder et al., 2003). Figure 11.12 shows the shape of
the caudal fin during one fin beat by a steadily swimming bluegill sunfish: the
dorsal lobe of the tail may undergo greater lateral excursion than the ventral
lobe, and the tail expands and contracts vertically during the tail beat.
Intrinsic tail muscles actively produce these changes in fin conformation
(Lauder, 1982, 1989).
    Wilga and Lauder’s (2002, 2004) studies on sharks indicate some possible
hydrodynamic eVects from this asymmetrical motion. They performed
DPIV in the wake of sharks, which also move their tails asymmetrically. In
this case, the inclined trailing edge of the morphologically asymmetrical
(heterocercal) caudal fin results in a ring‐within‐a‐ring vortex structure in
the wake (compare Figure 11.13 to Figure 11.10B). It is currently unknown
450                                              GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL




Fig. 11.12. Tail movement in fishes with a homocercal (externally symmetrical) tail need not be
symmetrical. (A) Two synchronized video frames showing tail position in bluegill sunfish
(Lepomis macrochirus) during steady rectilinear locomotion at 1.5 Ls 1. The left panel shows
the lateral (xy) view, while the right panel shows a posterior (yz) view through a mirror located
in the flow, as illustrated in Figure 11.5. The tail trailing edge has been marked on each side with
four small black markers to facilitate digitizing trailing edge angles and excursions. (B) Plot of yz
excursions of four tail markers. Tail motion is from left to right. Note that the dorsal tail lobe
can undergo considerably greater excursions than the ventral lobe. The two panels to the right
show expanded views of dorsal (marker 1) and ventral (marker 4) excursions to demonstrate
how the fish expands its tail during the beat. (Modified from Lauder, 2000.)
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                  451




Fig. 11.13. Schematic ring‐within‐a‐ring vortex ring structure in lateral and dorsal view shed by
the heterocercal (externally asymmetrical) tail of a swimming spiny dogfish shark (Squalus
acanthias). Three centers of vorticity are seen in the wake (red curved arrows, numbered 1 to
3 from dorsal to ventral). The central momentum jet through the upper ring is shown as black
arrows. Curved green arrows show fluid separating around the tail tips and inclined trailing
edge. (Modified from Wilga and Lauder, 2004.)




whether the asymmetric motion described above in fishes such as sunfish
that have homocercal tails aVects the flow in a similar way; the conforma-
tional changes these fishes use may also introduce additional hydrodynamic
complexity.
    Thus, the tail should not be viewed as a simple extension of the body, a
view encouraged by kinematic and hydrodynamic models of fish propulsion
based on horizontal mid‐body sections (Figures 11.1, 11.2, and 11.4).
Rather, the fish tail functions as a independent propulsive surface with
distinct three‐dimensional anatomy, shedding vortices and used to adjust
overall body trim (Liao and Lauder, 2000; Wilga and Lauder, 2002).
    Finally, it should be emphasized that flow passing over the tail is aVected
by the body upstream of it. In mackerel, for example, flow over the body
converges toward the tail (Figure 11.14A and B), producing a complex flow
around the caudal peduncle. Quantification of particle motion in this region
suggests that overall flow results from a combination of two patterns:
converging flow along the body, and flow wrapping around the peduncle
as it moves from side to side (Figure 11.14C and D) (Nauen and Lauder,
2001). The tail thus does not see freestream flow, but rather encounters flow
altered by the body and caudal peduncle. Further alteration of incident tail
flow occurs by the dorsal and anal fins, as is discussed in the next section.
452                                             GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL




Fig. 11.14. Flow patterns in the region of the caudal peduncle and leading edge of the tail in
mackerel (Scomber japonicus) swimming steadily at 1.2 Ls 1, measured by manually tracking
particle motion. Each symbol represents the position of an individual particle in the flow field.
(A) Particle trajectories relative to the horizontal for flow on the leading peduncular surface
(black dots) and trailing surface (gray dots). Linear regressions for each flow type show negative
slopes, indicating that flow is converging toward the midline of the tail. (B) Schematic summary
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                   453

C. Dorsal and Anal Fin Function

    The dorsal and anal fins of fishes are important fluid control structures
with their own intrinsic musculature (Gosline, 1971; Geerlink and Videler,
1974; Winterbottom, 1974; Jayne et al., 1996), ability to exert force on the
fluid environment (Arreola and Westneat, 1997; Hove et al., 2001; Standen
and Lauder, 2005), and discrete sharp trailing edges at which flow separation
may occur (Drucker and Lauder, 2001a; Lauder and Drucker, 2004). How-
ever, these fins have not received much attention in the hydrodynamic
literature on undulatory propulsion, although some computational models
do include passive median fins (Wolfgang et al., 1999; Zhu et al., 2002).
Webb (1978) and Webb and Keyes (1981) also discussed vortex sheets that
could be shed from median fin trailing edges. In part this lack of attention
may be due to the diYculty of studying fin function experimentally and to
the primary focus of many studies on undulation of the body midline itself.
    Key evidence that dorsal and anal fins play an important role in the
overall force balance during locomotion is provided by DPIV analyses of
their wakes (Figure 11.15). By recording dorsal fin wake flow patterns in the
horizontal plane (Figure 11.16A, planes 1, 2), it is clear that streamwise
momentum is added to the wake and that substantial side forces are pro-
duced by oscillating dorsal fins (Lauder and Drucker, 2004). In bluegill
sunfish, the soft dorsal fin contributes nearly 12% of overall locomotor
thrust force at a swimming speed of 1.1 Ls 1, and dorsal fin lateral force is
nearly twice thrust force (Drucker and Lauder, 2001a). In trout, lateral
forces are even higher relative to thrust force (greater than three times),
because the dorsal fin wake oscillates laterally, adding little downstream
momentum (Figure 11.15B). Dorsal fins in bluegill and trout thus actively
generate considerable side force, which may contribute to body stability
during locomotion.
    The dorsal and ventral lobes of the caudal fin pass through the wake shed
by dorsal and anal fins. The hydrodynamic environment experienced by the
tail is thus substantially diVerent than the freestream flow that might be
assumed in the absence of other median fins. In bluegill, dorsal fin wake
vortices encounter the tail and accelerate flow over the tail surface (note the
velocity vectors around the caudal fin in Figure 11.15A) (Drucker and


of mean particle tracks in (A) (large grey and black arrows representing trailing and leading
flows) giving the mean angle of convergent flow on both sides of the tail. (C and D) Schematic
hypothesis of the two peduncular flow patterns that combine to produce the pattern seen in
panels (A) and (B): observed flow is the result of convergence along the body surface as it slopes
toward the tail midline (C), and divergence results from side‐to‐side motion in which flow
encircles the peduncle (D). (Modified from Nauen and Lauder, 2001.)
454                                              GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL




Fig. 11.15. The dorsal fin of bony fishes is an active component of locomotor design and sheds a
discrete wake that alters incident flow at the tail. Both panels show flow as viewed from above
(xz plane). (A) Dorsal fin wake in bluegill sunfish, Lepomis macrochirus. The dorsal fin has
accelerated flow in the gap between the dorsal fin and tail, and has shed a vortex located just
above the tail in this image. (B) The dorsal fin wake in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)
sheds a linear array of vortex centers with strong lateral jets to each side. The tail passes through
these jets and through the centers of the dorsal fin vortices. White arrow pointing up in panel (B)
shows the direction of trout dorsal fin motion. Scales: arrow ¼ 10 cm/s; bar ¼ 1 cm. Mean
freestream flow has been subtracted from each image. (Modified from Drucker and Lauder,
2001a; Lauder and Drucker, 2004.)
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                    455




Fig. 11.16. (A) Schematic summary of the overall force balance on freely swimming fishes based
on recent particle image velocimetry data. The dorsal fin generates lateral forces (see Figure
11.15) with accompanying yaw and roll torques around the center of mass. These torques must
be countered by the action of the caudal, pectoral, and anal fins. The three numbered lines show
alternative horizontal slices through the fish at which the wake shed by the body and fins has
been analyzed: 1, wake of the dorsal fin alone; 2, wake of the dorsal fin and tail; 3, midline flow
of the body and tail (Drucker and Lauder, 2001a; Lauder et al., 2002; Lauder and Drucker,
2004; Tytell, 2004a; Tytell and Lauder, 2004). (B) Hypothesis of streamwise vortical separation
from the caudal, dorsal, and anal fins and the caudal peduncle in lateral view. Vortices are shed
from the dorsal (D), anal (A), and caudal (C) fins. The dorsal and ventral lobes of the caudal fin
may shed discrete vortices also (CD and CV). (C) Horizontal section through the middle of the
fish at the level of line 3 in (B). Because of undulatory motion, flow rolling up around the caudal
peduncle may not be destroyed by the tail, but may instead result in discrete vortices in the wake.
Only the upper vortices shed by the caudal peduncle and tail are shown. [Panel (A) modified
from Lauder and Drucker (2004).]
456                                   GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL


Lauder, 2001a). This suggests that dorsal fin vortices might increase tail
thrust if caudal fin surface pressures are reduced below what they would be
without the dorsal fin. Computational fluid dynamic modeling of dorsal‐
caudal fin wake interactions corroborates this view, and indicates that
vorticity shed from the dorsal fin promotes more rapid growth of the leading
edge vortex on the caudal fin, enhancing thrust (Mittal, 2004).
    Some fishes such as tuna swim routinely with the dorsal fin retracted
(except during maneuvering). In such cases, the tail encounters flow altered
only by the body, and roll stability must be achieved by adjusting the
position of pectoral fins, which are held in a partially extended position
during most routine locomotion (Magnuson, 1978).

D. Overall Force Balance and Three‐Dimensional Flow

    The large lateral momentum produced by the dorsal fin in ray‐finned
fishes has important consequences for the overall force balance during
locomotion (Figure 11.16A). This lateral force is generated above and
posterior to the center of mass and must thus generate both roll and yaw
torques. In order for fishes to swim steadily without roll and yaw, other fins
must compensate. To counter roll torques induced by the dorsal fin, the anal
fin could generate an opposing torque by generating lateral momentum to
the same side as the dorsal fin (Figure 11.16A). In addition, the tail and
pectoral fins may act in concert to correct any yaw torques.
    Overall, the picture that emerges from experimental studies of median fin
function is that a complex force balance exists among all fins and the body
and tail, even during steady rectilinear locomotion. Both median and paired
fins act in concert with the tail to stabilize the body. In light of these
experimental data, the classical categorization of locomotor modes as BCF
(body‐caudal fin) as distinct from MPF (median‐paired fin) seems extremely
simplistic, if not directly misleading, as median fins clearly are hydrodyna-
mically active during body and caudal fin locomotion, and may in fact play a
crucial role in body stability.
    Understanding the overall force balance on swimming fishes requires
data on buoyancy, body shape, body position, and the direction of forces
produced by the fins and body. Despite these complications, progress has
been made by quantifying body angles and flow over the body, and by
experimental investigation of individual fin forces. Many fishes swim with
a positive angle of attack to the body (He and Wardle, 1986; Webb, 1993a;
Wilga and Lauder, 1999; Liao and Lauder, 2000; Wilga and Lauder, 2000;
Nauen and Lauder, 2002a; Svendsen et al., 2005). This appears to be critical
to the overall force balance because body angle changes as swimming speed
increases, altering the lift force due to flow over the body.
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                  457

    An additional complication for understanding the overall force balance
on swimming fishes is the three‐dimensional nature of flow around the
body and tail. Figure 11.16B illustrates one possible pattern of flow separa-
tion from the trailing edge of the dorsal, anal, and caudal fins, as well as
the caudal peduncle in ray‐finned fishes. The homocercal tail itself could
generate additional small vortices due to rollup at the inclined edges
near the midline, by analogy with flow around the heterocercal shark tail
(Figure 11.13) (Wilga and Lauder, 2004), although these have yet to be seen
experimentally. As seen in a posterior (yz) view, then, the vortex wake could
consist of as many as 10 vortex filaments: two pairs shed by the tail, one pair
by the caudal peduncle due to flow separation at the upper and lower edges,
and one pair each by the dorsal and anal fins. How these link up to form
discrete vortex rings (Figure 11.10B) is not currently known. Even if the tail
moves so that only a single large vortex ring is shed by the caudal fin,
additional vortex rings from the dorsal and anal fin may still exist in the
wake, producing complex interactions among them. These speculations
remain to be examined experimentally, because the structure of streamwise
vorticity near the tail and caudal peduncle has not yet been observed. But the
importance of three‐dimensional eVects for understanding fish undulatory
hydrodynamics is clear.

E. Undulatory Locomotion in Turbulence

    In nature, fishes rarely swim in controlled flows like those produced in
laboratory flow tanks. Indeed, one might argue that the vast majority of the
locomotor time budget for fishes is spent in turbulent flows. From rapidly
flowing streams to strong ocean currents passing over an uneven benthic
habitat, most fish habitat is turbulent. While it is certainly understandable
that the vast majority of research has used controlled microturbulent flows
in laboratory flow tanks to study locomotion, fishes exhibit a wide array of
locomotor behaviors such as drafting or entraining on obstacles in turbulent
flows (Sutterlin and Waddy, 1975; Gerstner and Webb, 1998; McLaughlin
and Noakes, 1998; Webb, 1998). In addition, the use of much larger ‘‘natu-
ral’’ flow environments to study fish locomotion (Castro‐Santos, 2004, 2005;
Haro et al., 2004) reveals new strategies and levels of performance that are
not accessible in laboratory settings (Chapter 12).
    One example of an unusual locomotor behavior in larger‐scale turbulent
flows has been termed the ‘‘Kármán gait’’ by Liao et al. (2003a,b). By using a
D‐section cylinder to generate a regular array of alternating vortices in a
Kármán vortex street (Figure 11.17), Liao et al. observed that a variety of
fish species radically alter their locomotor kinematics when swimming in
vortical flows. During locomotion in freestream microturbulent flows, fishes
458                                            GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL




Fig. 11.17. The Kármán gait. (A and B) Trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) swimming in standard
freestream microturbulent flow (A) exhibit small lateral oscillations of their center of mass
compared to locomotion in a Kármán vortex street behind a D‐section cylinder (B). The
presence of Kármán vortices radically alters locomotor kinematics in fishes. Fishes in the
Kármán street swam three to four body lengths downstream from the D‐section cylinder
(5 cm wide), well downstream of the suction region behind the cylinder. (C) Quantification of
trout body position relative to vortex centers. The trout body outline is shown in black, the
midline as a red line, and background flow vorticity in color with superimposed black velocity
vectors. (D) During locomotion in a vortex street, trout weave in between vortex centers: trout
midlines are shown as red lines during locomotion from right to left, and centers of positive and
negative vorticity are indicated by red and blue dots. Flow is from left to right in all plots.
(Modified from Liao et al., 2003a,b.)
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                459

exhibited the usual pattern of body undulation with only small oscillations
of the center of mass (Figure 11.17A; also compare to Figures 11.1 and 11.2).
However, in a Kármán vortex street, fishes substantially altered the pattern
of body undulation (Figure 11.17B) and displayed very large center of mass
oscillations and large‐amplitude variations in lateral excursion along the
body. In addition, by using DPIV to record simultaneous flow and kinematic
patterns during the Kármán gait, Liao et al. (2003a) showed that fishes
weave in between oncoming vortices (Figure 11.17C and D). The pattern
of body bending appears to be primarily passive; both red and white myo-
tomal musculature are largely inactive during the Kármán gait (Liao, 2004).
Fishes may use pectoral fins or anterior red myotomal musculature to adjust
the body angle of attack to oncoming vortices, but otherwise de‐recruit
middle and posterior body musculature.


F. Acceleration and Maneuvering

    Very few studies have quantified either linear or angular acceleration in
fishes as part of the normal undulatory locomotor repertoire (see Webb,
1991). Of course, high‐speed unsteady C‐start movements with high accel-
erations and rapid turns have been studied frequently (see Chapter 9), but we
know little about routine (low‐speed) linear acceleration and turning by
fishes and their hydrodynamic causes. Drucker and Lauder (2001b) analyzed
the wake of the dorsal fin during controlled yawing maneuvers, and studies
by Wolfgang et al. (1999), Anderson (1996), and Anderson and Chhabra
(2002), and Müller et al. (2002) provided some data on the vortices formed
by turning fish. But these data lack accompanying detailed kinematics to
provide a link between the pattern of body undulation and wake hydrody-
namics.
    Tytell (2004b) studied controlled linear accelerations in eels (Anguilla)
under conditions that allowed quantification of both kinematics and the
hydrodynamic wake from the same individual locomotor sequences. Eels
accelerated or decelerated at rates ranging from 1.3 to 1.4 Ls 2, starting
from steady undulatory locomotion at speeds that varied from 0.6 to 1.9
Ls 1. These experiments showed that eels primarily varied tail tip velocity to
power acceleration, and that acceleration was accompanied by the addition
of significant streamwise momentum to the wake (Tytell, 2004b). The wake
of an accelerating eel thus takes on the appearance of the standard undula-
tory wake in fishes with discrete caudal fins and a downstream momentum
jet (e.g., Figures 11.9 and 11.10). Changes in wake structure during linear
acceleration in fishes with distinct median and caudal fins have yet to be
studied.
460                                  GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL


V. INTEGRATING THEORY AND EXPERIMENTAL DATA

    Comparison of elongated body theory to experimental data (and valida-
tion of the model) has mostly used energetic data on swimming eYciency,
as this was the only available body of data that permits comparison to
theory (Webb, 1975, 1978). Webb (1978, p. 215) noted that ‘‘Ideally, valida-
tion would be based on observations of flow about swimming fish . . .’’ and
indicated that such observations were problematic at that time. However,
the ability in recent years to directly quantify water flow patterns over
the body and fins of fishes using DPIV provides a new opportunity to
compare experimental hydrodynamic data on fish locomotion to predictions
of theoretical models (such as that of Lighthill, 1960), computational models
(Carling et al., 1998; e.g., Fauci and Peskin, 1988; Wolfgang et al., 1999;
Liu, 2002; Zhu et al., 2002; Cortez et al., 2004; Mittal, 2004), and the
results of experiments by fluid engineers on heaving and pitching
foils (Triantafyllou et al., 1993; Gopalkrishnan et al., 1994; Anderson
et al., 1998; Hover et al., 1998, 2004; Read et al., 2003; Triantafyllou
et al., 2004). Both avenues promise to provide considerable insight into the
mechanistic bases of force generation during undulatory locomotion, but
are still relatively unexplored.
    Tytell and Lauder (2004) and Tytell (2004a) compared several para-
meters measured from DPIV analyses of the wake of swimming eels to
predictions of wake impulse derived from Lighthill’s elongated body theory
(EBT). They found good agreement in estimates of power, but poor agree-
ment in force and impulse estimates. Mean lateral wake power calculated
from DPIV was not statistically diVerent from the value calculated from
EBT. The overall shape of the wake power profile as it varies over time
is also similar for both DPIV and EBT, although DPIV methods generate
higher peak power estimates than EBT. However, EBT generally
underestimates the wake forces as calculated from DPIV, by as much as
50%.
    It is somewhat surprising that agreement was observed in power but not
in force. One might expect that either both or neither would agree. However,
fluid dynamic eVects not included in EBT may aVect the wake power
without changing the force output substantially (Lighthill, 1971; Webb,
1975), and vice versa. Additionally, discrepancies between DPIV and EBT
may come from the assumptions required in DPIV force and power esti-
mates about the three‐dimensional structure of the wake. DPIV measures
only a single slice of the wake and thus requires assumptions about the flow
outside of this slice. Errors in three‐dimensional reconstruction may hence
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                  461

under‐ or over‐estimate total wake vorticity. Finally, measuring wake power
accurately with DPIV through an entire control volume is diYcult.


VI. PROSPECTUS

    Over the past 10 years, the development of new video and laser imaging
technologies has permitted advances in the study of undulatory hydrody-
namics in fishes that were not anticipated at the time the previous major
reviews of fish propulsion were written (Lindsey, 1978; Magnuson, 1978;
Webb, 1978; Blake, 1983; Webb and Weihs, 1983; Videler, 1993). Detailed
analyses of fin and body wake flow patterns are now possible, and recent
developments allow measurements of all three velocity components (Nauen
and Lauder, 2002b), quantification of undulatory profiles under controlled
swimming conditions (Dewar and Graham, 1994; Jayne and Lauder, 1995;
Gillis, 1998; Donley and Dickson, 2000; Donley and Shadwick, 2003),
and correlations between kinematic and hydrodynamic patterns (Tytell,
2004b). These advances have suggested the need for reevaluating previous
classification schemes for fish swimming, and have provided a wealth of new
information on how the body and fins interact with the fluid environment.
    However, there is still much to learn. We see the following five areas as
key directions for future progress. First, to date there has been only limited
interaction between researchers developing computational fluid dynamic
(CFD) models of undulatory propulsion (e.g., Fauci and Peskin, 1988;
Williams et al., 1995; Liu et al., 1996; Carling et al., 1998; Liu, 2002; Cortez
et al., 2004; Mittal, 2004) and workers conducting the experimental hydro-
dynamic studies described here. Additional boundary layer measurements,
like those of Anderson et al. (2000), are especially key, as they allow direct
comparisons of theoretical and empirical estimates of drag forces, which are
not measurable through wake flow visualization (Tytell and Lauder, 2004).
Future experimental work could focus on testing specific predictions of
computational models (as was done for eels; Tytell and Lauder, 2004), on
validating those models, and on collaborative studies to investigate new
phenomena such as dorsal‐caudal fin wake interactions.
    Second, we have very little experimental data on three‐dimensional flow
patterns over the body and fins in swimming fishes. Such data are critical for
understanding the vortical structure of the wake, for understanding how fins
interact with each other hydrodynamically, and for testing assumptions
of theoretical models of fish propulsion. In addition, quantifying three‐
dimensional flow patterns is necessary to understand the hydrodynamic
significance of diVerences among fish species in body shape, and, specifically,
462                                           GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL


to determine why eel‐shaped fish bodies produce a wake diVerent from fishes
with discrete caudal fins.
    Third, there are currently few data on maneuvering and locomotion in
turbulent flows. Both of these locomotor modes are in need of substantial
experimental study if we are to understand more completely the locomotor
repertoire of fishes.
    Fourth, the function of fins and their hydrodynamic interactions with
movement of the body is still a largely unexplored area. A hallmark of fish
functional design is the use of multiple control surfaces projecting from the
body (Lauder and Drucker, 2004), yet we have only modest data on dorsal
fin function, a smattering of data on the anal fin, and eVectively no data on
the function of pelvic fins.
    Finally, studies of external hydrodynamics need to be better connected to
internal body mechanics, muscle activity and, ultimately, the neural circuitry
that controls locomotion. The flow patterns discussed in this chapter develop
due to a complex balance between the forces they apply to a fish’s body
and the forces a fish’s muscles apply back to the fluid. The dynamics of
this coupling have been preliminarily approached by Cortez et al. (2004), but
substantially more research must be done to understand it better. Ulti-
mately, these forces are controlled and modulated by the nervous system
(Grillner, 2003), which itself responds to feedback from the same hydro-
dynamic forces. Integrating experimental and computational studies of
hydrodynamic flow patterns with research on the mechanics of the body
and the neural control of locomotion (Williams et al., 1995; Ekeberg and
Grillner, 1999) to understand the process of locomotion from nervous
system to fluid, remains a key challenge for the future.


                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

    We thank all members of the Lauder Lab for many discussions regarding fish locomotion,
especially Paul Webb and Bill Schultz for stimulating debate on the balance of thrust and drag.
Kathy Dickson kindly supplied data on scombrid locomotion for Figure 11.1, and Jacquan
Horton, Adam Summers, and Eliot Drucker provided data for Figure 11.3B. This research was
supported by the National Science Foundation under grant IBN0316675 to G.V.L.


REFERENCES

Aleev, Y. G. (1977). ‘‘Nekton.’’ Junk Publishers, The Hague.
Anderson, E. J., McGillis, W. R., and Grosenbaugh, M. A. (2000). The boundary layer of
    swimming fish. J. Exp. Biol. 204, 81–102.
Anderson, J. (1996). Vorticity control for eYcient propulsion. Ph.D. thesis, MIT/WHOI
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                    463

    96–02.
Anderson, J. M., and Chhabra, N. (2002). Maneuvering and stability performance of a robotic
    tuna. Integr. Comp. Biol. 42, 118–126.
Anderson, J. M., Streitlein, K., Barrett, D., and Triantafyllou, G. S. (1998). Oscillating foils of
    high propulsive eYciency. J. Fluid Mech. 360, 41–72.
Arnold, G. P., Webb, P. W., and Holford, B. H. (1991). The role of the pectoral fins in station‐
    holding of Atlantic salmon parr (Salmo salar L.). J. Exp. Biol. 156, 625–629.
Arreola, V., and Westneat, M. W. (1997). Mechanics of propulsion by multiple fins: Kinematics
    of aquatic locomotion in the burrfish (Chilomycterus schoepfi). Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond.
    B 263, 1689–1696.
Barrett, D., Triantafyllou, M. S., Yue, D. K. P., Grosenbaugh, M. A., and Wolfgang, M. J.
    (1999). Drag reduction in fish‐like locomotion. J. Fluid Mech. 392, 183–212.
Batchelor, G. K. (1973). ‘‘An Introduction to Fluid Mechanics.’’ Cambridge Univ. Press,
    Cambridge, UK.
Blake, R. W. (1983). ‘‘Fish Locomotion.’’ Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK.
Bone, Q. (1978). Locomotor muscle. In ‘‘Fish Physiology. Vol. VII. Locomotion’’ (Hoar, W. S.,
    and Randall, D. J., Eds.), pp. 361–424. Academic Press, New York.
Breder, C. M. (1926). The locomotion of fishes. Zoologica N. Y. 4, 159–256.
Carling, J. C., Williams, T. L., and Bowtell, G. (1998). Self‐propelled anguilliform swimming:
    Simultaneous solution of the two‐dimensional Navier‐Stokes equations and Newton’s laws
    of motion. J. Exp. Biol. 201, 3143–3166.
Castro‐Santos, T. (2004). Quantifying the combined eVects of attempt rate and swimming
    capacity on passage through velocity barriers. Can. J. Fish. Aq. Sci. 61, 1602–1615.
Castro‐Santos, T. (2005). Optimal swim speeds for traversing velocity barriers: An analysis of
    volitional high‐speed swimming behavior of migratory fishes. J. Exp. Biol. 208, 421–432.
Childress, S. (1981). ‘‘Mechanics of Flying and Swimming.’’ Cambridge Univ. Press, Cam-
    bridge, UK.
Cortez, R., Fauci, L., Cowen, N., and Dillon, R. (2004). Simulation of swimming organisms:
    Coupling internal mechanics with external fluid dynamics. Comp. Sci. Eng. 6, 38–45.
Daniel, T. L. (1984). Unsteady aspects of aquatic locomotion. Amer. Zool. 24, 121–134.
Daniel, T. L., and Webb, P. W. (1987). Physics, design and locomotor performance.
    In ‘‘Comparative Physiology: Life in Water and on Land’’ (Dejours, P., Bolis, L., Taylor,
    C. R., and Weibel, E. R., Eds.), pp. 343–369. Liviana Press, Springer Verlag, New York.
Denny, M. W. (1993). ‘‘Air and Water. The Biology and Physics of Life’s Media.’’ Princeton
    Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ.
Dewar, H., and Graham, J. B. (1994). Studies of tropical tuna swimming performance in a large
    water tunnel. III. Kinematics. J. Exp. Biol. 192, 45–59.
Donley, J., and Dickson, K. A. (2000). Swimming kinematics of juvenile Kawakawa tuna
    (Euthynnus aYnis) and chub mackerel (Scomber japonicus). J. Exp. Biol. 203, 3103–3116.
Donley, J., and Shadwick, R. (2003). Steady swimming muscle dynamics in the leopard shark
    Triakis semifasciata. J. Exp. Biol. 206, 1117–1126.
Drucker, E. G., and Lauder, G. V. (2000). A hydrodynamic analysis of fish swimming speed:
    Wake structure and locomotor force in slow and fast labriform swimmers. J. Exp. Biol. 203,
    2379–2393.
Drucker, E. G., and Lauder, G. V. (2001a). Locomotor function of the dorsal fin in teleost
    fishes: Experimental analysis of wake forces in sunfish. J. Exp. Biol. 204, 2943–2958.
Drucker, E. G., and Lauder, G. V. (2001b). Wake dynamics and fluid forces of turning
    maneuvers in sunfish. J. Exp. Biol. 204, 431–442.
Ekeberg, Ö. (1993). A combined neuronal and mechanical model of fish swimming. Biol.
464                                              GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL

     Cybernet. 69, 363–374.
Ekeberg, Ö., and Grillner, S. (1999). Simulations of neuromuscular control in lamprey
     swimming. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. B 354, 895–902.
Faber, T. E. (1995). ‘‘Fluid Dynamics for Physicists.’’ Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK.
Fauci, L. J., and Peskin, C. S. (1988). A computational model of aquatic animal locomotion. J.
     Comp. Phys. 77, 85–108.
Ferry, L. A., and Lauder, G. V. (1996). Heterocercal tail function in leopard sharks: A three‐
     dimensional kinematic analysis of two models. J. Exp. Biol. 199, 2253–2268.
Fish, F., and Lauder, G. V. (2005). Passive and active flow control by swimming fishes and
     mammals. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 38, 193–224.
Geerlink, P. J., and Videler, J. (1974). Joints and muscles of the dorsal fin of Tilapia nilotica L.
     (Fam. Cichlidae). Neth. J. Zool. 24, 279–290.
Gerstner, C. L., and Webb, P. W. (1998). The station‐holding performance of the plaice
     Pleuronectes platessa on artificial substratum ripples. Can. J. Zool. 76, 260–268.
Gillis, G. B. (1996). Undulatory locomotion in elongate aquatic vertebrates: Anguilliform
     swimming since Sir. James Gray. Amer. Zool. 36, 656–665.
Gillis, G. B. (1998). Environmental eVects on undulatory locomotion in the American eel
     Anguilla rostrata: Kinematics in water and on land. J. Exp. Biol. 201, 949–961.
Gopalkrishnan, R., Triantafyllou, M. S., Triantafyllou, G. S., and Barrett, D. (1994). Active
     vorticity control in a shear flow using a flapping foil. J. Fluid Mech. 274, 1–21.
Gosline, W. A. (1971). ‘‘Functional Morphology and Classification of Teleostean Fishes.’’ Univ.
     of Hawaii Press, Honolulu, HI.
Graham, J. B., and Dickson, K. A. (2004). Tuna comparative physiology. J. Exp. Biol. 207,
     4015–4024.
Gray, J. (1933). Studies in animal locomotion. I. The movement of fish with special reference to
     the eel. J. Exp. Biol. 10, 88–104.
Gray, J. (1936). Studies in animal locomotion. VI. The propulsive powers of the dolphin. J. Exp.
     Biol. 13, 170–199.
Grillner, S. (2003). The motor infrastructure: From ion channels to neuronal networks. Nat.
     Rev. Neurosci. 4, 573–586.
Haro, A., Castro‐Santos, T., Noreika, J., and Odeh, M. (2004). Swimming performance of
     upstream migrant fishes in open‐channel flow: A new approach to predicting passage
     through velocity barriers. Can. J. Fish. Aq. Sci. 61, 1590–1601.
He, P., and Wardle, C. S. (1986). Tilting behavior of the Atlantic mackerel, Scomber scombrus,
     at low swimming speeds. J. Fish. Biol. 29, 223–232.
Hertel, H. (1966). ‘‘Structure, Form and Movement.’’ Reinhold, New York, NY.
Hess, F., and Videler, J. J. (1984). Fast continuous swimming of saithe (Pollachius virens): A
     dynamic analysis of bending moments and muscle power. J. Exp. Biol. 109, 229–251.
Horton, J. M., Drucker, E., and Summers, A. (2003). Swiftly swimming fish show evidence of
     stiff spines. Integ. Comp. Biol. 43, 905.
Hove, J. R., O’Bryan, L. M., Gordon, M. S., Webb, P. W., and Weihs, D. (2001). Boxfishes
     (Teleostei: Ostraciidae) as a model system for fishes swimming with many fins: Kinematics.
     J. Exp. Biol. 204, 1459–1471.
Hover, F. S., Haugsdal, O., and Triantafyllou, M. S. (2004). EVect of angle of attack profiles in
     flapping foil propulsion. J. Fluids Struct. 19, 37–47.
Hover, F. S., Techet, A. H., and Triantafyllou, M. S. (1998). Forces on oscillating uniform and
     tapered cylinders in crossflow. J. Fluid Mech. 363, 97–114.
Jayne, B. C., and Lauder, G. V. (1995). Speed eVects on midline kinematics during steady
     undulatory swimming of largemouth bass, Micropterus salmoides. J. Exp. Biol. 198, 585–602.
Jayne, B. C., Lozada, A., and Lauder, G. V. (1996). Function of the dorsal fin in bluegill sunfish:
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                 465

    Motor patterns during four locomotor behaviors. J. Morphol. 228, 307–326.
Lauder, G. V. (1982). Structure and function of the caudal skeleton in the pumpkinseed sunfish,
    Lepomis gibbosus. J. Zool. (Lond.) 197, 483–495.
Lauder, G. V. (1989). Caudal fin locomotion in ray‐finned fishes: Historical and functional
    analyses. Amer. Zool. 29, 85–102.
Lauder, G. V. (2000). Function of the caudal fin during locomotion in fishes: Kinematics, flow
    visualization, and evolutionary patterns. Amer. Zool. 40, 101–122.
Lauder, G. V. (2005). Locomotion. In ‘‘The Physiology of Fishes’’ (Evans, D. H., and Clai-
    borne, J. B., Eds.). pp. 3–46. 3rd edn, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Lauder, G. V., and Drucker, E. (2002). Forces, fishes, and fluids: Hydrodynamic mechanisms of
    aquatic locomotion. News Physiolog. Sci. 17, 235–240.
Lauder, G. V., and Drucker, E. G. (2004). Morphology and experimental hydrodynamics of fish
    fin control surfaces. IEEE J. Oceanic Eng. 29, 556–571.
Lauder, G. V., Drucker, E. G., Nauen, J., and Wilga, C. D. (2003). Experimental hydrodynam-
    ics and evolution: Caudal fin locomotion in fishes. In ‘‘Vertebrate Biomechanics and
    Evolution’’ (Bels, V., Gasc, J.‐P., and Casinos, A., Eds.), pp. 117–135. Bios Scientific
    Publishers, Oxford.
Lauder, G. V., Nauen, J., and Drucker, E. G. (2002). Experimental hydrodynamics and
    evolution: Function of median fins in ray‐finned fishes. Integr. Comp. Biol. 42, 1009–1017.
Lauder, G. V., and Tytell, E. D. (2004). Three Gray classics on the biomechanics of animal
    movement. J. Exp. Biol. 207, 1597–1599.
Liao, J. (2004). Neuromuscular control of trout swimming in a vortex street: Implications for
    energy economy during the Karman gait. J. Exp. Biol. 207, 3495–3506.
Liao, J., and Lauder, G. V. (2000). Function of the heterocercal tail in white sturgeon: Flow
    visualization during steady swimming and vertical maneuvering. J. Exp. Biol. 203,
    3585–3594.
Liao, J., Beal, D. N., Lauder, G. V., and Triantafyllou, M. S. (2003a). Fish exploiting vortices
    decrease muscle activity. Science 302, 1566–1569.
Liao, J., Beal, D. N., Lauder, G. V., and Triantafyllou, M. S. (2003b). The Kármán gait: Novel
    body kinematics of rainbow trout swimming in a vortex street. J. Exp. Biol. 206, 1059–1073.
Lighthill, J. (1960). Note on the swimming of slender fish. J. Fluid Mech. 9, 305–317.
Lighthill, J. (1969). Hydromechanics of aquatic animal propulsion: A survey. Ann. Rev. Fluid
    Mech. 1, 413–446.
Lighthill, J. (1970). Aquatic animal propulsion of high hydromechanical eYciency. J. Fluid
    Mech. 44, 265–301.
Lighthill, J. (1971). Large‐amplitude elongated body theory of fish locomotion. Proc. Roy. Soc.
    Lond. B 179, 125–138.
Lindsey, C. C. (1978). Form, function, and locomotory habits in fish. In ‘‘Fish Physiology. Vol.
    VII. Locomotion’’ (Hoar, W. S., and Randall, D. J., Eds.), pp. 1–100. Academic Press, New
    York.
Liu, H. (2002). Computational biological fluid dynamics: Digitizing and visualizing animal
    swimming and flying. Integr. Comp. Biol. 42, 1050–1059.
Liu, H., Wassersug, R. J., and Kawachi, K. (1996). A computational fluid dynamics study of
    tadpole swimming. J. Exp. Biol. 199, 1245–1260.
Magnuson, J. J. (1978). Locomotion by scombrid fishes: Hydromechanics, morphology, and
    behavior. In ‘‘Fish Physiology. Vol. VII. Locomotion’’ (Hoar, W. S., and Randall, D. J.,
    Eds.), pp. 239–313. Academic Press, New York.
McCutchen, C. W. (1977). Froude propulsive eYciency of a small fish, measured by wake
    visualization. In ‘‘Scale EVects in Animal Locomotion’’ (Pedley, T. J., Ed.), pp. 339–363.
466                                            GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL

    Academic Press, London.
McLaughlin, R. L., and Noakes, D. L. G. (1998). Going against the flow: An examination of the
    propulsive movements made by young brook trout in streams. Can. J. Fish. Aq. Sci. V55,
    853–860.
Mittal, R. (2004). Computational modeling in biohydrodynamics: Trends, challenges, and
    recent advances. IEEE J. Oceanic Eng. 29, 595–604.
Müller, U. K., Smit, J., Stamhuis, E. J., and Videler, J. J. (2001). How the body contributes to
    the wake in undulatory fish swimming: Flow fields of a swimming eel (Anguilla anguilla). J.
    Exp. Biol. 204, 2751–2762.
Müller, U. K., Stamhuis, E., and Videler, J. (2002). Riding the waves: The role of the body wave
    in undulatory fish swimming. Integr. Comp. Biol. 42, 981–987.
Müller, U. K., Van den Heuvel, B., Stamhuis, E. J., and Videler, J. J. (1997). Fish foot prints:
    Morphology and energetics of the wake behind a continuously swimming mullet (Chelon
    labrosus Risso). J. Exp. Biol. 200, 2893–2906.
Murray, M., and Howle, L. E. (2003). Spring stiVness influence of an oscillating propulsor. J.
    Fluids Struct. 17, 915–926.
Nauen, J. C., and Lauder, G. V. (2001). Locomotion in scombrid fishes: Visualization of flow
    around the caudal peduncle and finlets of the Chub mackerel Scomber japonicus. J. Exp.
    Biol. 204, 2251–2263.
Nauen, J. C., and Lauder, G. V. (2002a). Hydrodynamics of caudal fin locomotion by chub
    mackerel, Scomber japonicus (Scombridae). J. Exp. Biol. 205, 1709–1724.
Nauen, J. C., and Lauder, G. V. (2002b). Quantification of the wake of rainbow trout (Oncor-
    hynchus mykiss) using three‐dimensional stereoscopic digital particle image velocimetry. J.
    Exp. Biol. 205, 3271–3279.
Noca, F., Shiels, D., and Jeon, D. (1999). A comparison of methods for evaluating time‐
    dependent fluid dynamic forces on bodies, using only velocity fields and their derivatives.
    J. Fluids Struct. 13, 551–578.
Pedley, T. J. (1977). ‘‘Scale EVects in Animal Locomotion.’’ Academic Press, London.
RaVel, M., Willert, C., and Kompenhans, J. (1998). ‘‘Particle Image Velocimetry: A Practical
    Guide.’’ Springer‐Verlag, Heidelberg.
Read, D. A., Hover, F. S., and Triantafyllou, M. S. (2003). Forces on oscillating foils for
    propulsion and maneuvering. J. Fluids Struct. 17, 163–183.
Rohr, J., and Fish, F. (2004). Strouhal numbers and optimization of swimming by odontocete
    cetaceans. J. Exp. Biol. 207, 1633–1642.
Rosen, M., Spedding, G. R., and Hedenstrom, A. (2004). The relationship between wingbeat
    kinematics and vortex wake of a thrush nightingale. J. Exp. Biol. 207, 4255–4268.
Rosen, M. W. (1959). Water flow about a swimming fish. Naval Ordnance Test Station.
    Technical Paper. 2298, 1–96.
Sakakibara, J., Nakagawa, M., and Yoshida, M. (2004). Stereo‐PIV study of flow around a
    maneuvering fish. Exp. Fluid 36, 282–293.
Schultz, W. W., and Webb, P. W. (2002). Power requirements for swimming: Do new methods
    resolve old questions? Integr. Comp. Biol. 42, 1018–1025.
Standen, E. M., and Lauder, G. V. (2005). Dorsal and anal fin function in bluegill sunfish
    (Lepomis macrochirus): Three‐dimensional kinematics during propulsion and maneuvering.
    J. Exp. Biol. 205, 2753–2763.
Sutterlin, A. M., and Waddy, S. (1975). Possible role of the posterior lateral line in obstacle
    entrainment by Brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis). J. Fish. Res. Bd. Can. 32, 2441–2446.
Svendsen, J. C., Koed, A., and Lucas, M. C. (2005). The angle of attack of the body of common
    bream while swimming at diVerent speeds in a flume tank. J. Fish. Biol. 66, 572–577.
Taylor, G. I. (1952). Analysis of the swimming of long and narrow animals. Proc. Roy. Soc.
11. HYDRODYNAMICS OF UNDULATORY PROPULSION                                                 467

    Lond. A 214, 158–183.
Taylor, G. K., Nudds, R. L., and Thomas, A. (2003). Flying and swimming animals cruise at a
    Strouhal number tuned for high power eYciency. Nature 425, 707–711.
Triantafyllou, M. S., and Triantafyllou, G. S. (1995). An eYcient swimming machine. Sci. Am.
    272, 64–70.
Triantafyllou, G. S., Triantafyllou, M. S., and Grosenbaugh, M. A. (1993). Optimal thrust
    development in oscillating foils with application to fish propulsion. J. Fluids Struct. 7,
    205–224.
Triantafyllou, M. S., Techet, A. H., and Hover, F. S. (2004). Review of experimental work in
    biomimetic foils. IEEE J. Oceanic Eng. 29, 585–594.
Tytell, E. D. (2004a). The hydrodynamics of eel swimming II. EVect of swimming speed. J. Exp.
    Biol. 207, 3265–3279.
Tytell, E. D. (2004b). Kinematics and hydrodynamics of linear acceleration in eels, Anguilla
    rostrata. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. B 271, 2535–2540.
Tytell, E. D., and Lauder, G. V. (2004). The hydrodynamics of eel swimming. I. Wake structure.
    J. Exp. Biol. 207, 1825–1841.
Veerman, H. P., and Den Boer, R. (2000). PIV measurements in presence of a large out of plane
    component. In ‘‘Particle Image Velocimetry. Progress toward Industrial Application’’
    (Stanislas, M., Kompenhans, J., and Westerweel, J., Eds.), pp. 217–225. Kluwer Academic,
    Dordrecht.
Videler, J. J. (1993). ‘‘Fish Swimming.’’ Chapman and Hall, New York.
Videler, J. J., and Hess, F. (1984). Fast continuous swimming of two pelagic predators, saithe
    (Pollachius virens) and mackerel (Scomber scombrus): A kinematic analysis. J. Exp. Biol.
    109, 209–228.
Webb, P. W. (1975). Hydrodynamics and energetics of fish propulsion. Bull. Fish. Res. Bd. Can.
    190, 1–159.
Webb, P. W. (1978). Hydrodynamics: Nonscombroid fish. In ‘‘Fish Physiology. Vol. VII.
    Locomotion’’ (Hoar, W. S., and Randall, D. J., Eds.), pp. 189–237. Academic Press, New
    York.
Webb, P. W. (1991). Composition and mechanics of routine swimming of rainbow trout,
    Oncorhynchus mykiss. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 48, 583–590.
Webb, P. W. (1993a). Is tilting behavior at low speed swimming unique to negatively buoyant
    fish? Observations on steelhead trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss, and bluegill, Lepomis macro-
    chirus. J. Fish. Biol. 43, 687–694.
Webb, P. W. (1993b). Swimming. In ‘‘The Physiology of Fishes’’ (Evans, D. H., Ed.), pp. 47–73.
    CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Webb, P. W. (1998). Entrainment by river chub Nocomis micropogon and smallmouth bass
    Micropterus dolomieu on cylinders. J. Exp. Biol. 201, 2403–2412.
Webb, P. W., and Blake, R. W. (1985). Swimming. In ‘‘Functional Vertebrate Morphology’’
    (Hildebrand, M., Bramble, D. M., Liem, K. F., and Wake, D. B., Eds.), pp. 110–128.
    Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.
Webb, P. W., and Keyes, R. S. (1981). Division of labor between median fins in swimming
    dolphin (Pisces: Coryphaenidae). Copeia 1981, 901–904.
Webb, P. W., and Weihs, D. (1983). ‘‘Fish Biomechanics.’’ Praeger Publishers, New York.
Weihs, D. (1972). A hydrodynamic analysis of fish turning manoeuvres. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. B
    182B, 59–72.
Westerweel, J., and Oord, J.v. (2000). Stereoscopic PIV measurements in a turbulent boundary
    layer. In ‘‘Particle Image Velocimetry. Progress toward Industrial Application’’ (Stanislas,
    M., Kompenhans, J., and Westerweel, J., Eds.), pp. 459–478. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht.
Wilga, C. D., and Lauder, G. V. (1999). Locomotion in sturgeon: Function of the pectoral fins.
468                                             GEORGE V. LAUDER AND ERIC D. TYTELL

    J. Exp. Biol. 202, 2413–2432.
Wilga, C. D., and Lauder, G. V. (2000). Three‐dimensional kinematics and wake structure of the
    pectoral fins during locomotion in leopard sharks Triakis semifasciata. J. Exp. Biol. 203,
    2261–2278.
Wilga, C. D., and Lauder, G. V. (2002). Function of the heterocercal tail in sharks: Quantitative
    wake dynamics during steady horizontal swimming and vertical maneuvering. J. Exp. Biol.
    205, 2365–2374.
Wilga, C. D., and Lauder, G. V. (2004). Hydrodynamic function of the shark’s tail. Nature 430,
    850.
Willert, C. (1997). Stereoscopic digital particle image velocimetry for application in wind tunnel
    flows. Meas. Sci. Technol. 8, 1465–1479.
Willert, C. E., and Gharib, M. (1991). Digital particle image velocimetry. Exp. Fluid 10,
    181–193.
Williams, T. L., Bowtell, G., Carling, J. C., Sigvardt, K. A., and Curtin, N. A. (1995). Interac-
    tions between muscle activation, body curvature and the water in the swimming lamprey.
    In ‘‘Biological Fluid Dynamics’’ (Ellington, C. P., and Pedley, T. J., Eds.), pp. 49–59.
    Company of Biologists, Cambridge.
Winterbottom, R. (1974). A descriptive synonymy of the striated muscles of the Teleostei. Proc.
    Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 125, 225–317.
Wolfgang, M. J., Anderson, J. M., Grosenbaugh, M., Yue, D., and Triantafyllou, M. (1999).
    Near‐body flow dynamics in swimming fish. J. Exp. Biol. 202, 2303–2327.
Wu, Y. T. (1971). Hydromechanics of swimming propulsion. Part I. Swimming of a two‐
    dimensional flexible plate at variable forward speeds in an inviscid fluid. J. Fluid Mech.
    46, 337–355.
Zhu, Q., Wolfgang, M. J., Yue, D. K. P., and Triantafyllou, G. S. (2002). Three‐dimensional
    flow structures and vorticity control in fish‐like swimming. J. Fluid Mech. 468, 1–28.
